Earlier versions of the CHASE code are available at via the NIVA Denmark GitHUB site (https://github.com/¬NIVA-Denmark/CHASE).

The HELCOM Hazardous Substances Status Assessment Tool (CHASE) was originally developed for the first HELCOM holistic assessment (HELCOM 2010a), where an integrated thematic assessment of hazardous substances was one component (HELCOM 2010b). CHASE 1.0 performs an integrated status assessment of hazardous substances based on the four ecological objectives which define the strategic goal for hazardous substances in the HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan: (1) concentrations of hazardous substances close to natural levels, (2) all fish safe to eat, (3) healthy wildlife, and (4) radioactivity at pre Chernobyl level (HELCOM 2010b). A further version of the tool (CHASE 2.0) was developed to carry out the integrated assessment but also include the different sampling matrix types (Andersen et al 2016).  
For the second holistic assessment, the CHASE tool was developed further to meet the needs of the ‘State of the Baltic Sea’ report. The development was carried out within the HELCOM BalticBOOST project, which was co-funded by the EU, and included the development of test cases where different types of hazardous substances information (i.e. different sets of indicators) were integrated. The development of the CHASE tool was guided by two HELCOM workshops with participation of experts from the Contracting Parties of HELCOM, the HOLAS II Core Team and the State and Conservation Working Group. The further developed tool, CHASE 3.0, and the method for integrated assessment of hazardous substances was approved by the HELCOM Heads of Delegation (HELCOM 2016b) for the assessment of contamination status presented in the ‘State of the Baltic Sea’ report.
In CHASE 3.0, as applied in the current integrated assessment of hazardous substances, only seven core indicators, covering twelve substances or substance groups are used. These indicators and their substances are used as they meet the requirements of having wide ranging spatial and temporal monitoring (core indicators) and have threshold values that are agreed by all HELCOM Contracting Parties. The CHASE tool is constructed so that further indicators or substances can be added as the number of relevant core indicators expands.

Andersen, J.H., Murray, C., Larsen, M. M., Green, N., Høgåsen, T., Dahlgren, E., Garnaga-Budré, G., Gustavson, K., Haarich, M., Kallenbach, E. M. F., Mannio, J., Strand, J., Korpinen, S. (2016): Development and testing of a prototype tool for integrated assessment of chemical status in marine environments.  Environmental Monitoring and Assessessment 188: 115. doi:10.1007/s10661-016-5121-x

HELCOM (2010a): Ecosystem Health of the Baltic Sea 2003–2007: HELCOM Initial Holistic Assessment. Baltic Sea Environment Proceedings 122
HELCOM (2010b): Hazardous substances in the Baltic Sea – An integrated thematic assessment of hazardous substances in the Baltic Sea. Baltic Sea Environment Proceedings 120B

